Overview. The problems facing education in the sciences are manifold, and the needs have never been higher both for industry and research. Students learn at different rates. Some will struggle to grasp concepts that others (possibly even the instructor) find intuitive.  To avoid missing opportunities for the opening of a student's mind, the instructor needs to be able to give a student a large number of problems and to provide individual assessment and guidance.  It is for this purpose that intelligent tutoring systems (ITS) were developed.

In computer programming instruction, intelligent tutoring systems are computer-aided teaching and assessment tools designed to aid and supplement course instruction. Most ITS systems provide adaptive tutoring, tailoring both the course content and assessments for students so as to satisfy an objective criterion. One example is to minimize regret, or the amount of time required to learn a certain amount of material :cite:`tekin2014`.

This work is an effort to build the first ITS that is aware of and makes significant use of all the Bloom taxonomic levels in guiding a student's education. It will also integrate advanced automatic grading concepts, such as dependency-graph-based short-answer grading and machine learning techniques for code grading, to provide the student with better feedback on more advanced topics. Further, it will provide a way to apply the scientific method to teaching, and to enable progress in discovering and disseminating effective teaching strategies.

Intellectual Merit. The proposed project advances knowledge by integrating techniques in ITS research to provide a full-featured system which can profile students, detailing their interests, strengths and weaknesses. Using profile information, the ITS can then generate interesting problems to solve and cover weak areas, while at the same time covering the full range of requisite concepts in the course and holding the difficulty level across students equal.

The system ensures that the student undergoes a smooth progression across Bloom cognitive taxonomic levels (Knowledge, Comprehension, Application, Analysis, Evaluation, Synthesis), which is a task that no other ITS to date handles. This is to guarantee the student is prepared for the problem which the ITS gives; i.e.  the student meets all prerequisites to solve a given problem. The proposed project also aims to improve on existing auto-grading techniques for both short answers and code. In addition, the project endeavors to find a generalized algorithm for scheduling content in such a way as to optimize each student's acquisition of the material.

A software development plan has been conceived and is detailed in this proposal. Prototype versions of some components of the software have already been implemented, such as the databases, interfaces, and primitive auto-graders. 

Broader Impact. This project will advance discovery and understanding while promoting teaching, training, and learning, for example, by training graduate students, mentoring postdoctoral researchers and junior faculty, involving undergraduates in research experiences, and participating in the recruitment, training, and professional development of K-12 mathematics and science teachers.

We believe that by combining these techniques we will be able to make a higher percentage of students successful in computer science, particularly students who have been disadvantaged by lesser exposure to scientific concepts and training at an earlier age.

In addition, our ITS has the ability to aid students with disabilities, as it offers the opportunity for a student to self-teach in a way which stimulates initiative on the part of the student.  The ITS also offers further research potential in data-intensive educational psychology, which may improve accessibility of STEM resources to women, low-SES and minority groups, and persons with disabilities.

